README.md, before:

# Inventing a Better Compression Algorithm for a Specific Problem

**Domain-specific knowledge can lead to dramatically better compression results compared to general-purpose algorithms like `brotli`.**

## What domain are we entwined with for today?

A game of snake. We are only interested that it can be represented as a sequence of coordinates on infinite (not really) integer space, where the first coordinate is the head of a snake.

Each coordinate is a pair of numbers representing a position:

- The first number is the X position (horizontal)
- The second number is the Y position (vertical)

```python
(2, 1)  # means X = 2, Y = 1
```

## Let's take this example to demonstrate typical enconding

Consider this snake on a grid:

```txt
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6
  0 . . . . . . .
  1 . . H ● ● . .
  2 . . . . ● . .
  3 . . . . . . .
  4 . . . . . . .
```

This snake is represented as where H is the head and ● represents body segments:

```python
[(2,1), (3,1), (4,1), (4,2)]
```

But what how much memory it takes?

## Sailing to the land of Rusty Crabs

We need to decide on the *first*[^1] representation of this sequence in Rust.

```python
[(2,1), (3,1), (4,1), (4,2)]
```

## Take a top-down approach at decomposing this representation

1. it's a sequence
2. a sequence of pairs
3. a pair of `x` and `y` positions
4. `x` position
5. `y` position

From here we take a bottom-top approach:

### `x` position and `y` position

- no reason for them to take differing amounts of memory
- it must be in the space of both negative and positive numbers, so we have few *built-in* choices
  - `isize`: pointer-sized signed integer (32-bit on 32-bit systems, 64-bit on 64-bit systems)
    - type not to be used in this context
  - `i8`: 8-bit signed integer (-128 to 127)
    - likely too small
  - `i16`: 16-bit signed integer (-32,768 to 32,767)
    - might suffice, but risky if requirements change
  - `i32`: 32-bit signed integer (-2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647)
    - sweet spot
  - `i64`: 64-bit signed integer (-9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807)
    - clearly too large

*So choose `i32` for both `x` and `y` positions*

### a pair of `x` and `y` positions

A *pair* is *product type* [^2] and may be represented:

- as tuple

  ```rust
  let as_tuple: (i32, i32) = (0, 0);
  ```

- as struct

  ```rust
  pub struct Pos {
      pub x: i32,
      pub y: i32,
  }
  ```

What do we choose?

- from the perspective of memory consumption
  - both take the same amount of memory
    - for this matter, memory layout [^3] for `struct` does not matter: `#[repr(C)]` or default Rust alignment take the same space

- from the perspective of usability
  - tuple

    ```rust
    let pos = (0, 0);
    let x = pos.0; // access by index in the tuple
    let x = pos.1; // access by index in the tuple
    ```

  - struct

    ```rust
    let pos = Pos { x: 0, y: 0}
    let x = pos.x; // access by attribute name
    let y = pos.y; // access by attribute name
    ```

*`struct` wins from the perspective of usability.*, because naming is better than indexing.

### a sequence of pairs

> we don't care about modifications - we care about compression of the whole state

So we won't use a mutable sequences like `Vec`, queues, etc.

Let's pick **immutable slices** and be *consistent* to use this datastructure all the way.

Example:

```rust
let positions: &[Pos] = [
    Pos { x: 0, y: 0 },
    Pos { x: 1, y: 1 },
    Pos { x: 2, y: 2 },
    Pos { x: 3, y: 3 },
]
.as_slice();
```

---

**So we'll use immutable slices of sequences consisting of pairs of `x` and `y` coordinates represented as `i32` composed in `struct`'s named `Pos`.**

[^1]: Because: firstly, yet we don't even consider optimizations - we need to get stuff done; and secondly it's just *one of the views* on the same *data* - we could transform it for more convenience later. Later - when we'll deal with compression.

[^2]: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product_type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product_type)

[^3]: [https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html)

### Memory Estimations of Current Reprsentation

An instance of `Pos` size is 2 `i32` sizes. So 2 * 4 bytes. 8 bytes.

The size of a sequence proportional to the size of a snake. And after the compression it will remain true as well.

So the task is to find a more compressed `view` than *8 bytes * snake size*.

## How domain knowledge might help to optimize the memory consumption?

Well. Let's look once more at the first example.

```txt
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6
  0 . . . . . . .
  1 . . H ● ● . .
  2 . . . . ● . .
  3 . . . . . . .
  4 . . . . . . .
```

We see that a snake consists of connected points.

If it were to go `Up` it would look like

```txt
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6
  0 . . H . . . .
  1 . . ● ● ● . .
  2 . . . . . . .
  3 . . . . . . .
  4 . . . . . . .
```

Interesting, so `Up` is a direction. Something that seems to have place in **our domain**.

Let's define a sum type [^4] - an enum in Rust:

```rust
pub enum Direction {
    Up,
    Bottom,
    Left,
    Right,
}
```

Could we define a snake just in terms of directions? No.

But, if we keep the head (or tail) of snake as a starting point, we could define the rest of the snake a sequence of directions.

And what's interesting about `Direction` is that there are *only* 4 choices to pick from. It screams - here's our optimization.

So how many *bits*, we need to encode a `Direction`?

```txt
⌈log₂(n)⌉

where:
- n = number of possible values
- ⌈ ⌉ = ceiling function (round up to nearest integer)
```

So for `Direction`, for 4 choices: bits needed = ⌈log₂(4)⌉ = ⌈2⌉ = **2 bits**.

Let's implement both encode and decode functions on `Direction`

```rust
impl Direction {
    pub fn encode(&self) -> u8 {
        match self {
            Self::Up => 0b00,
            Self::Bottom => 0b01,
            Self::Left => 0b10,
            Self::Right => 0b11,
        }
    }

    pub fn decode(value: u8) -> Option<Self> {
        match value {
            0b00 => Some(Self::Up),
            0b01 => Some(Self::Bottom),
            0b10 => Some(Self::Left),
            0b11 => Some(Self::Right),
            _ => None,
        }
    }
}
```

We use a `u8` since it's a built-in type and there ain't a `u2` built-in. Since it will act as an intermeditary value, it's ok.

[^4]: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tagged_union](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tagged_union)

Commit message:

docs(readme.md): show new representation and memory estimates

README.md, after:

# Inventing a Better Compression Algorithm for a Specific Problem

**Domain-specific knowledge can lead to dramatically better compression results compared to general-purpose algorithms like `brotli`.**

## What domain are we entwined with for today?

A game of snake. We are only interested that it can be represented as a sequence of coordinates on infinite (not really) integer space, where the first coordinate is the head of a snake.

Each coordinate is a pair of numbers representing a position:

- The first number is the X position (horizontal)
- The second number is the Y position (vertical)

```python
(2, 1)  # means X = 2, Y = 1
```

## Let's take this example to demonstrate typical enconding

Consider this snake on a grid:

```txt
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6
  0 . . . . . . .
  1 . . H ● ● . .
  2 . . . . ● . .
  3 . . . . . . .
  4 . . . . . . .
```

This snake is represented as where H is the head and ● represents body segments:

```python
[(2,1), (3,1), (4,1), (4,2)]
```

But what how much memory it takes?

## Sailing to the land of Rusty Crabs

We need to decide on the *first*[^1] representation of this sequence in Rust.

```python
[(2,1), (3,1), (4,1), (4,2)]
```

## Take a top-down approach at decomposing this representation

1. it's a sequence
2. a sequence of pairs
3. a pair of `x` and `y` positions
4. `x` position
5. `y` position

From here we take a bottom-top approach:

### `x` position and `y` position

- no reason for them to take differing amounts of memory
- it must be in the space of both negative and positive numbers, so we have few *built-in* choices
  - `isize`: pointer-sized signed integer (32-bit on 32-bit systems, 64-bit on 64-bit systems)
    - type not to be used in this context
  - `i8`: 8-bit signed integer (-128 to 127)
    - likely too small
  - `i16`: 16-bit signed integer (-32,768 to 32,767)
    - might suffice, but risky if requirements change
  - `i32`: 32-bit signed integer (-2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647)
    - sweet spot
  - `i64`: 64-bit signed integer (-9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807)
    - clearly too large

*So choose `i32` for both `x` and `y` positions*

### a pair of `x` and `y` positions

A *pair* is *product type* [^2] and may be represented:

- as tuple

  ```rust
  let as_tuple: (i32, i32) = (0, 0);
  ```

- as struct

  ```rust
  pub struct Pos {
      pub x: i32,
      pub y: i32,
  }
  ```

What do we choose?

- from the perspective of memory consumption
  - both take the same amount of memory
    - for this matter, memory layout [^3] for `struct` does not matter: `#[repr(C)]` or default Rust alignment take the same space

- from the perspective of usability
  - tuple

    ```rust
    let pos = (0, 0);
    let x = pos.0; // access by index in the tuple
    let x = pos.1; // access by index in the tuple
    ```

  - struct

    ```rust
    let pos = Pos { x: 0, y: 0}
    let x = pos.x; // access by attribute name
    let y = pos.y; // access by attribute name
    ```

*`struct` wins from the perspective of usability.*, because naming is better than indexing.

### a sequence of pairs

> we don't care about modifications - we care about compression of the whole state

So we won't use a mutable sequences like `Vec`, queues, etc.

Let's pick **immutable slices** and be *consistent* to use this datastructure all the way.

Example:

```rust
let positions: &[Pos] = [
    Pos { x: 0, y: 0 },
    Pos { x: 1, y: 1 },
    Pos { x: 2, y: 2 },
    Pos { x: 3, y: 3 },
]
.as_slice();
```

---

**So we'll use immutable slices of sequences consisting of pairs of `x` and `y` coordinates represented as `i32` composed in `struct`'s named `Pos`.**

[^1]: Because: firstly, yet we don't even consider optimizations - we need to get stuff done; and secondly it's just *one of the views* on the same *data* - we could transform it for more convenience later. Later - when we'll deal with compression.

[^2]: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product_type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product_type)

[^3]: [https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html)

### Memory Estimations of Current Reprsentation

An instance of `Pos` size is 2 `i32` sizes. So 2 * 4 bytes. 8 bytes.

The size of a sequence proportional to the size of a snake. And after the compression it will remain true as well.

So the task is to find a more compressed `view` than *8 bytes * snake size*.

## How domain knowledge might help to optimize the memory consumption?

Well. Let's look once more at the first example.

```txt
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6
  0 . . . . . . .
  1 . . H ● ● . .
  2 . . . . ● . .
  3 . . . . . . .
  4 . . . . . . .
```

We see that a snake consists of connected points.

If it were to go `Up` it would look like

```txt
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6
  0 . . H . . . .
  1 . . ● ● ● . .
  2 . . . . . . .
  3 . . . . . . .
  4 . . . . . . .
```

Interesting, so `Up` is a direction. Something that seems to have place in **our domain**.

Let's define a sum type [^4] - an enum in Rust:

```rust
pub enum Direction {
    Up,
    Down,
    Left,
    Right,
}
```

Could we define a snake just in terms of directions? No.

But, if we keep the head (or tail) of snake as a starting point, we could define the rest of the snake a sequence of directions.

And what's interesting about `Direction` is that there are *only* 4 choices to pick from. It screams - here's our optimization.

So how many *bits*, we need to encode a `Direction`?

```txt
⌈log₂(n)⌉

where:
- n = number of possible values
- ⌈ ⌉ = ceiling function (round up to nearest integer)
```

So for `Direction`, for 4 choices: bits needed = ⌈log₂(4)⌉ = ⌈2⌉ = **2 bits**.

Let's implement both encode and decode functions on `Direction`

```rust
impl Direction {
    pub fn encode(&self) -> u8 {
        match self {
            Self::Up => 0b00,
            Self::Down => 0b01,
            Self::Left => 0b10,
            Self::Right => 0b11,
        }
    }

    pub fn decode(value: u8) -> Option<Self> {
        match value {
            0b00 => Some(Self::Up),
            0b01 => Some(Self::Down),
            0b10 => Some(Self::Left),
            0b11 => Some(Self::Right),
            _ => None,
        }
    }
}
```

We use a `u8` since it's a built-in type and there ain't a `u2` built-in. Since it will act as an intermeditary value, it's ok.

Back to this example

```txt
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6
  0 . . . . . . .
  1 . . H ● ● . .
  2 . . . . ● . .
  3 . . . . . . .
  4 . . . . . . .
```

How we view a snake in terms of a starting point and consequent directions?

```rust
let starting_position: Pos = Pos { x: 2, y: 1 };
let consequent_directions =
    [Direction::Right, Direction::Right, Direction::Down].as_slice();
```

So compared to the previous representation which took *8 bytes * 4 = 32 bytes*, this one takes *8 bytes + 2 bits \* 3 = 8.75 bytes*.

And the longer a snake - more beneficial such optimization, since the starting point is most expensive.

[^4]: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tagged_union](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tagged_union)
